#LyX 2.2 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 508
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "default" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Visualizing clinical weakness with open source software
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Complaints of weakness are common[1].
 The neuromuscular exam is commonly performed among many specialties; specialize
d and detailed examinations are a mainstay of the neurological exam and
 central to the examination of patients with neuromuscular disorders.
 In the academic medical setting, clear and informative communication between
 medical students, residents and attendings is critical to optimal patient
 care.
 Here we present a free, open-source software application for generating
 plots of muscle weakness; the plots provide an adjunct to the written tables
 of weakness normally used in clinical settings.
 The plots are informative and intuitive; they provide a platform for pattern
 recognition.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Previous groups have addressed visualizing muscle weakness using software
 [2], however the lack of distribution of the tool and hidden underlying
 code limited it's usefulness for the field.
 There has been a recent push in neuroscience for open source tools [3];
 such an approach would also benefit the medical community.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Here we present a tool for clincal use; the code and tool are freely available
 and modular.
 We hope the framework will be adapted for similar uses by the community
 to develop additional useful clinical tools.
 The regular use of the tool should be beneficial for communication between
 caretakers and for patient education.
 Furthermore, the shift to open source tools in medicine is one we should
 purposefully pursue.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Methods:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Clinical rationale
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Software
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Results:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Give use cases, convince the audience that distributions are simple to appreciat
e.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Jeremy, you can add your cases here.
 We want cases that broadly represent neurology and clear weakness differential
 diagnoses.
 Also I would like a mix of pediatric and adult conditions, if possible.
 As it turns out, finding data from published case reports is essentially
 impossible.
 We will move forward with simulated cases.
 Will include:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
stroke patient examples -- can do time series showing weakness that improves
 over time disease with proximal > distal weakness disease with distal >
 proximal weakness sma patient, because I like sma Herm says he'll do these:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
stroke (hemiparesis); polymyositis; muscular dystrophy; and guillan barre.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Discussion
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Here we present free, open-source software for visualizing the distribution
 of muscle weakness.
 The software is built upon (Jason enter a brief description here).
 The software is simple and intuitive.
 The plots produced provide enough information for the viewer to appreciate
 the distribution of weakness; the inclusion of distracting information
 has been avoided.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We anticipate this tool will be useful in the clinic and in case reports.
 Ideally, the use of this tool by medical students and residents will allow
 for more clear patient presentations.
 The onus will no longer be on the reciever to generate a mental image of
 weakness.
 The image can be generated by the presenter and shown to the reciever;
 this should decrease confusion and aid in diagnosis.
 This tool also provides a useful platform for figure generation for publication
s.
 By displaying weakness in a uniform structure, the range of weaknesses
 among cases and progression over time can be easily appreciated.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The introduction of technology to patient care is not novel; indeed, clinic
 visits have become increasingly dependent on technology [4].
 We do not intend to add more clutter.
 Effective communication requires a patient and physician connection which
 can be negatively impacted by techonological distraction.
 Our decision to include less detail was purposeful.
 The tool should provide enough information to make distribution obvious,
 but it should not include any distractions.
 By introducing software that is simple to use, freely available and modifiable,
 we hope to improve clinical diaganosis and communication.
 Furthermore, we hope the release of source code will inspire others to
 join us in open source medical tool development.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
References:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
[1] Saguil, A.
 "Evaluation of the patient with muscle weakness." American family physician
 71.7 (2005): 1327-1336.
 This article is a nice general overview of weakness from a primary care
 perspective
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
[2] Pieterse, A.
 J., Voermans, N.
 C., Tuinenga, H.
 S., & Van Engelen, B.
 G.
 (2008).
 Computer-aided visualization of muscle weakness distribution.
 Journal of neurology, 255(11), 1670-1678.
 This article is quite similar to our idea -- notably I had the idea for
 this tool before finding this article.
 While they solve the same problem we seek to solve, there are many areas
 where we improve and expand their work.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
[3] Freeman, Jeremy.
 "Open source tools for large-scale neuroscience." Current opinion in neurobiolog
y 32 (2015): 156-163.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
[4] Arnold Relman.
 2014.
 "On Breaking One's Neck." The New York Review of Books.
 Feb 6, 2015.
 Relevant paragraph from article: "What did this experience teach me about
 the current state of medical care in the US? Quite a lot, as it turns out.
 I always knew that the treatment of the critically ill in our best teaching
 hospitals was excellent.
 That was certainly confirmed by the life-saving treatment I received in
 the Massachusetts General emergency room.
 Physicians there simply refused to let me die (try as hard as I might).
 But what I hadn’t appreciated was the extent to which, when there is no
 emergency, new technologies and electronic record-keeping affect how doctors
 do their work.
 Attention to the masses of data generated by laboratory and imaging studies
 has shifted their focus away from the patient.
 Doctors now spend more time with their computers than at the bedside.
 That seemed true at both the ICU and Spaulding.
 Reading the physicians’ notes in the MGH and Spaulding records, I found
 only a few brief descriptions of how I felt or looked, but there were copious
 reports of the data from tests and monitoring devices.
 Conversations with my physicians were infrequent, brief, and hardly ever
 reported." (emphaisis added)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Paternostro-Sluga, T., Grim-Stieger, M., Posch, M., Schuhfried, O., Vacariu,
 G., Mittermaier, C., ...
 & Fialka-Moser, V.
 (2008).
 Reliability and validity of the Medical Research Council (MRC) scale and
 a modified scale for testing muscle strength in patients with radial palsy.
 Journal of rehabilitation medicine, 40(8), 665-671.
 An article describing and validating the MRC weakness scale
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Medical Research Council.
 Aids to examination of the peripheral nervous system.
 Memorandum no.
 45.
 London: Her Majesty’s Stationary Office; 1976.
 This is the MRC scale reference.
 But the link is to a book review of the actual work.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Hough, C.
 L., Lieu, B.
 K., & Caldwell, E.
 S.
 (2011).
 Manual muscle strength testing of critically ill patients: feasibility
 and interobserver agreement.
 Crit Care, 15(1), R43.
 This article uses a modifited sum-score.
 Jason, perhaps this could be useful to look at to develop (or use their
 method) to get a summary statistic for weakness.
 It would be nice to have a metric that tells proximal-ness and distal-ness.
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
