#Software for visualization of muscle weakness

##Introduction

Complaints of weakness are common[1]. The neuromuscular exam is commonly performed among many specialties; specialized and detailed examinations are a mainstay of the neurological exam and central to the examination of patients with neuromuscular disorders.
In the academic medical setting, clear and informative communication between medical students, residents and attendings is critical to optimal patient care. Here we present a free, open-source software application for generating plots of muscle weakness; the plots provide an adjunct to the written tables of weakness normally used in clinical settings. The plots are informative and intuitive; they provide a platform for pattern recognition.

Previous groups have addressed visualizing muscle weakness using software [2], however the lack of distribution of the tool and hidden underlying code limited it's usefulness for the field. There has been a recent push in neuroscience for open source tools [3]; such an approach would also benefit the medical community.

Here we present a tool for clincal use; the code and tool are freely available and modular. We hope the framework will be adapted for similar uses by the community to develop additional useful clinical tools. The regular use of the tool should be beneficial for communication between caretakers and for patient education. Furthermore, the shift to open source tools in medicine is one we should purposefully pursue.


##Methods:
Clinical rationale: I’ll write this part

Software rationale: Jason can write this part — what is the software built on, why is that useful, etc


##Results:
Give use cases, convince the audience that distributions are simple to appreciate.


Jeremy, you can add your cases here. We want cases that broadly represent neurology and clear weakness differential diagnoses. Also I would like a mix of pediatric and adult conditions, if possible.
As it turns out, finding data from published case reports is essentially impossible. We will move forward with simulated cases.
Will include:
- stroke patient examples -- can do time series showing weakness that improves over time
- disease with proximal > distal weakness
- disease with distal > proximal weakness
- sma patient, because I like sma

Herm says he'll do these:
- stroke (hemiparesis); 
- polymyositis;
- muscular dystrophy;
- and guillan barre.


##Discussion:
Here we present free, open-source software for visualizing the distribution of muscle weakness. The software is built upon (Jason enter a brief description here). The software is simple and intuitive. The plots produced provide enough information for the viewer to appreciate the distribution of weakness; the inclusion of distracting information has been avoided.

We anticipate this tool will be useful in the clinic and in case reports. Ideally, the use of this tool by medical students and residents will allow for more clear patient presentations. The onus will no longer be on the reciever to generate a mental image of weakness. The image can be generated by the presenter and shown to the reciever; this should decrease confusion and aid in diagnosis.
This tool also provides a useful platform for figure generation for publications. By displaying weakness in a uniform structure, the range of weaknesses among cases and progression over time can be easily appreciated.

The introduction of technology to patient care is not novel; indeed, clinic visits have become increasingly dependent on technology [4]. We do not intend to add more clutter. Effective communication requires a patient and physician connection which can be negatively impacted by techonological distraction. Our decision to include less detail was purposeful. The tool should provide enough information to make distribution obvious, but it should not include any distractions. By introducing software that is simple to use, freely available and modifiable, we hope to improve clinical diaganosis and communication. Furthermore, we hope the release of source code will inspire others to join us in tool development.


##References:
[1] [Saguil, A. "Evaluation of the patient with muscle weakness." American family physician 71.7 (2005): 1327-1336.](http://www.aafp.org/afp/2005/0401/p1327.html) This article is a nice general overview of weakness from a primary care perspective

[2] [Pieterse, A. J., Voermans, N. C., Tuinenga, H. S., & Van Engelen, B. G. (2008). Computer-aided visualization of muscle weakness distribution. Journal of neurology, 255(11), 1670-1678.](http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00415-008-0959-7#/page-1)
This article is quite similar to our idea -- notably I had the idea for this tool before finding this article. While they solve the same problem we seek to solve, there are many areas where we improve and expand their work.


[3] [Freeman, Jeremy. "Open source tools for large-scale neuroscience." Current opinion in neurobiology 32 (2015): 156-163.](http://thefreemanlab.com/work/papers/freeman-2015-current-opinion.pdf)

[4] [Arnold Relman. 2014. "On Breaking One's Neck." The New York Review of Books.  Feb 6, 2015.](http://www.nybooks.com/articles/2014/02/06/on-breaking-ones-neck/)


[Paternostro-Sluga, T., Grim-Stieger, M., Posch, M., Schuhfried, O., Vacariu, G., Mittermaier, C., ... & Fialka-Moser, V. (2008). Reliability and validity of the Medical Research Council (MRC) scale and a modified scale for testing muscle strength in patients with radial palsy. Journal of rehabilitation medicine, 40(8), 665-671.](https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Martin_Posch/publication/23484750_Reliability_and_validity_of_the_Medical_Research_Council_%28MRC%29_scale_and_a_modified_scale_for_testing_muscle_strength_in_patients_with_radial_palsy/links/0c96051f8cd6db8174000000.pdf)
An article describing and validating the MRC weakness scale

[Medical Research Council. Aids to examination of the peripheral nervous system. Memorandum no. 45. London: Her Majesty’s Stationary Office; 1976.](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0022510X77902052) This is the MRC scale reference. But the link is to a book review of the actual work.

[Hough, C. L., Lieu, B. K., & Caldwell, E. S. (2011). Manual muscle strength testing of critically ill patients: feasibility and interobserver agreement. Crit Care, 15(1), R43.](http://link.springer.com/article/10.1186%2Fcc10005?LI=true) This article uses a modifited sum-score. Jason, perhaps this could be useful to look at to develop (or use their method) to get a summary statistic for weakness. It would be nice to have a metric that tells proximal-ness and distal-ness.


